# Release Notes for Ansible AVD 4.x.x

- Documentation for AVD version `4.x.x` [available here](https://www.avd.sh/en/devel/)

## Release 4.0.0

### Changes to requirements

- AVD now requires ansible-core from **2.12.6** to **2.14.x** excluding **2.13.0**
!!! note
    Excluded version **2.13.0** has an issue in `ansible-core`, which is [fixed](https://github.com/ansible/ansible/blob/v2.13.1/changelogs/CHANGELOG-v2.13.rst#bugfixes) in **2.13.1**. Plugin loader will now load config data for plugin by name instead of by file to avoid issues with the same file being loaded under different names (Fully-Qualified-Collection-Name + short-name).

  If Ansible is installed using pip, a supported version can be installed with `pip3 install "ansible-core>=2.12.6,<2.15.0,!=2.13.0"`.

- The `arista.avd` collection no longer depends directly on `ansible.netcommon`. `ansible.netcommon` is still a depedency of `arista.eos` and `arista.cvp`, which are both dependencies of `arista.avd`.

### Breaking changes or behavioral changes

Breaking changes may require modifications to the inventory or playbook. See the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md)
for details.

#### Non port-channel related config is no longer ignored on port-channel member ethernet_interfaces

The change has been incorporated into `eos_designs` so action is only required when defining new interfaces
with `structured_config`, `custom_structured_configuration_` or when using `eos_cli_config_gen` directly.

With AVD 4.0.0 port-channel member interfaces defined under `ethernet_interfaces` will no longer ignore the
`type` setting which defaults to `switched`. Other switchport or IP related features are also no longer ignored.

For interfaces with LACP fallback, this may be the intended behavior, and this is the reason for this change.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#non-port-channel-related-config-is-no-longer-ignored-on-port-channel-member-ethernet_interfaces).

#### Change upper case CVP roles and module vars to lower case

Potentially breaking in rare cases where custom logic relies on the registered vars or content of files.
The custom scripts must be updated to use the lowercase variable instead.

Component(s) name
Roles:

- arista.avd.eos_config_deploy_cvp
- arista.avd.cvp_configlet_upload

Modules:

- arista.avd.inventory_to_container
- arista.avd.configlet_build_config

The following vars are changed from uppercase to lowercase, to conform with Ansible linting requirements.

```sh
CVP_CONFIGLETS -> cvp_configlets
CVP_CONFIGLETS_STATUS -> cvp_configlets_status
CVP_CONTAINERS -> cvp_containers
CVP_CONTAINER_RESULTS -> cvp_container_results
CVP_DEVICES -> cvp_devices
CVP_DEVICES_RESULTS -> cvp_devices_results
CVP_FACTS -> cvp_facts
CVP_TOPOLOGY -> cvp_topology
CVP_VARS -> cvp_vars
```

#### Require `enabled` key under `queue_monitor_length`

To avoid ambiguous YAML data input, the data model for `queue_monitor_length` has been updated to require the `enabled` key to be set.

The change has been incorporated into `eos_designs` so action is only required when defining `structured_configuration` directly.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#require-enabled-key-under-queue_monitor_length).

#### Disabling IGMP Snooping globally no longer blocks other IGMP snooping configuration

The `eos_cli_config_gen` role previously blocked IGMP snooping configuration if `ip_igmp_snooping.globally_enabled` was set to `false`.
With AVD version 4.0.0 this changes to align closer to EOS behavior, where globally disabling IGMP snooping still allows for underlying
configuration to be present.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#new-behavior-for-ip_igmp_snooping).

#### MLAG peer link allowed vlans no longer has a default value

`mlag_peer_link_allowed_vlans` no longer has a default value of "2-4094".

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#mlag-peer-link-allowed-vlans).

#### IP routing is no longer configured on pure L2 devices

For node types like `l2leaf` where `underlay_router` is set to `false` under `node_type_keys` AVD versions below 4.0.0
still rendered `ip routing` in the configuration. With AVD version 4.0.0 `ip routing` is no longer configured for `l2leaf`
or other node types with `underlay_router: false`.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#ip-and-ipv6-routing-is-no-longer-configured-on-pure-l2-devices).

#### BGP is no longer configured on irrelevant nodes

An example of an "irrelevant node" is a pure L3 Spine in L3LS running ISIS or OSPF in the underlay. As long as the spine is not
set as route-server for any overlay BGP protocol, there is no need for `router bgp <asn>` to be configured on this device.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#bgp-is-no-longer-configured-on-irrelevant-nodes).

#### Link-local IPv6 addressing is implicitly enabled when configuring IPv6 Anycast IP

Per Arista best practice, all SVIs configured with `ipv6 address virtual` should also have
`ipv6 enable` configured, to use link-local IPv6 addresses for NDv6 operations.

With AVD version 4.0.0 this best practice is now implemented by default.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#link-local-ipv6-addressing-is-implicitly-enabled-when-configuring-ipv6-anycast-ip).

#### Removed eos_designs variables

- `evpn_rd_type` has been removed and replaced with `overlay_rd_type`.
- `evpn_rt_type` has been removed and replaced with `overlay_rt_type`.
- `vxlan_vlan_aware_bundles` has been removed and replaced with `evpn_vlan_aware_bundles`

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#network-services-variables).

- `bgp_peer_groups.IPv4_UNDERLAY_PEERS` has been removed and replaced with `bgp_peer_groups.ipv4_underlay_peers` to avoid upper-case variables.
- `bgp_peer_groups.MLAG_IPv4_UNDERLAY_PEER` has been removed and replaced with `bgp_peer_groups.mlag_ipv4_underlay_peer` to avoid upper-case variables.
- `bgp_peer_groups.EVPN_OVERLAY_PEERS` has been removed and replaced with `bgp_peer_groups.evpn_overlay_peers` to avoid upper-case variables.
- `connected_endpoints_key.[].adapters.[].server_ports` has been removed and replaced with `connected_endpoints_key.[].adapters.[].endpoint_ports`.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#bgp-variables).

#### Change in defaults eos_designs in underlay ISIS variables

- `isis_default_circuit_type`  default changed from `level-1-2` (EOS default) to `level-2`.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#isis-underlay-variables).

### change in defaults eos_designs in BGP variables

- `bgp_default_ipv4_unicast: <bool> -> default false` was introduced to implement the best practice of disabling the default activation of IPv4 unicast address-family.
- `bgp_graceful_restart: <bool> -> default true` was introduced to implement the best practice of enabling router bgp `graceful-restart`.
- `bgp_update_wait_install: <bool> -> default true` was introduced to implement the best practice of enable router bgp `update wait-install` under `router bgp` and BGP VRF definitions for VRFs containing BGP peerings.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#bgp-variables).

### change in default for eos_designs point-to-point ethernet interfaces

The default value for `p2p_uplinks_mtu` has changed from 9000 to 9214.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#p2p-uplink-mtu).

#### Change in eos_designs behavior in core_interfaces variables

- `core_interfaces.p2p_links.[].ptp_enable` changed to `core_interfaces.p2p_links.[].ptp.enabled` to create syntax consistency when configuring PTP.
- `core_interfaces.p2p_links.[].ptp.enabled` requires the `ptp.enabled: true` to be set at the fabric level.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#core-interfaces-variables).

#### Change in eos_designs defaults and behavior in l3_edge variables

- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].qos_profile` default changed from `null` to now leverage `p2p_uplinks_qos_profile` as its default value.
- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].include_in_underlay_protocol` default changed from `false` to `true`.
- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].isis_circuit_type` -> default changed from `level-1-2` (EOS default) set by `isis_default_circuit_type` to `level-2`.
- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].isis_hello_padding` default changed from `false` to `true` (EOS default).
- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].ptp_enable` changed to `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].ptp.enabled` to create syntax consistency when configuring PTP.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#l3-edge-variables).

#### New required `enabled` key under `vlan_interfaces.[].ip_attached_host_route_export`

To avoid ambiguous YAML data input, the data model for `vlan_interfaces.[].ip_attached_host_route_export` has been updated to require
an `enabled: true` key to be added.

The change has been incorporated into `eos_designs` so action is only required when defining `structured_configuration` directly.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#new-required-enabled-key-under-vlan_interfacesip_attached_host_route_export).

### New data model for `address_families` under `router_bgp.vrfs`

New data models to replace deprecated `router_bgp.vrfs[].address_families` keys have been added to eos_cli_config_gen.

The change has been incorporated into `eos_designs` so no action is necessary to retain the same functionality.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#new-data-models-for-address_families-under-router_bgpvrfs)

#### Changes to inband management for L2 switches

With AVD version 4.0.0 some of the default values for inband management are changing:

- The SVI MTU was derived from `p2p_uplinks_mtu` with a default value of `9000`. Now the SVI MTU defaults to `1500` and is configurable with `inband_mgmt_mtu`.
- The SVI description was hardcoded to `L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT`. Now the default SVI description is `Inband Management` and is configurable with `inband_mgmt_description`.
- The VLAN name was hardcoded to `L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT`. Now the default VLAN name is `INBAND_MGMT` and is configurable with `inband_mgmt_vlan_name`.

The inband management interfaces are now documented and configured as `vlan_interfaces` instead of `management_interfaces`.

See details in the [Porting guide for AVD 4.x.x](../porting-guides/4.x.x.md#changes-to-inband-management-for-l2-switches).

#### Several internal switch.* facts and avd_switch_facts have been removed

As part of optimizing performance and code reuse, the amount of `switch.*` facts has been limited.

The `switch.*` and `avd_switch_facts` are internal datamodels used for sharing data between various stages of `eos_designs`. They **should not**
be used in custom templates for interface descriptions or IP addressing, since they are subject to change without notice.

See the porting guide for suggestions on how to leverage AVD logic in combination with Ansible inline Jinja2.

The following facts have been removed from `switch.*` and `avd_switch_facts.<hostname>.switch.*`:

```yaml
switch.always_configure_ip_routing
switch.always_include_vrfs_in_tenants
switch.bgp
switch.bgp_cluster_id
switch.bgp_defaults
switch.connected_endpoints
switch.default_downlink_interfaces
switch.default_overlay_routing_protocol
switch.default_underlay_routing_protocol
switch.enable_trunk_groups
switch.evpn_gateway_remote_peers
switch.evpn_gateway_vxlan_l2
switch.evpn_gateway_vxlan_l3
switch.evpn_gateway_vxlan_l3_inter_domain
switch.filter_only_vlans_in_use
switch.filter_tags
switch.filter_tenants
switch.hostname
switch.inband_management_gateway
switch.inband_management_interface
switch.inband_management_ip
switch.inband_management_parents
switch.inband_management_role
switch.igmp_snooping_enabled
switch.ipv6_mgmt_ip
switch.ipv6_router_id
switch.ipvpn_gateway
switch.isis_instance_name
switch.isis_net
switch.is_type
switch.lacp_port_id
switch.link_tracking_groups
switch.loopback_ipv4_offset
switch.loopback_ipv6_offset
switch.loopback_ipv6_pool
switch.mlag
switch.mlag_dual_primary_detection
switch.mlag_ibgp_origin_incomplete
switch.mlag_interfaces_speed
switch.mlag_l3
switch.mlag_peer_ip
switch.mlag_peer_ipv4_pool
switch.mlag_peer_l3_ip
switch.mlag_peer_l3_ipv4_pool
switch.mlag_peer_l3_vlan
switch.mlag_peer_l3_vlan_structured_config
switch.mlag_peer_link_allowed_vlans
switch.mlag_peer_mgmt_ip
switch.mlag_peer_vlan
switch.mlag_peer_vlan_structured_config
switch.mlag_port_channel_structured_config
switch.mlag_role
switch.mlag_support
switch.multi_vtep
switch.network_services_l1
switch.network_services_l2
switch.network_services_l3
switch.node_sid
switch.only_local_vlan_trunk_groups
switch.overlay_address_families
switch.overlay_rd_type_admin_subfield
switch.overlay_routing_protocol
switch.overlay_routing_protocol_address_family
switch.platform_settings
switch.rack
switch.raw_eos_cli
switch.short_esi
switch.spanning_tree_mode
switch.spanning_tree_priority
switch.spanning_tree_root_super
switch.struct_cfg
switch.system_mac_address
switch.trunk_groups
switch.underlay
switch.underlay_ipv6
switch.underlay_multicast
switch.underlay_router
switch.uplink_bfd
switch.uplink_interfaces
switch.uplink_interface_speed
switch.uplink_macsec
switch.uplink_ptp
switch.uplink_structured_config
switch.uplink_switches
switch.uplink_switch_interfaces
switch.uplink_type
switch.virtual_router_mac_address
switch.vtep
switch.vtep_loopback
```

#### `eos_cli_config_gen` sanitized device documentation

- Starting AVD 4.0.0, the `eos_cli_config_gen` role replaces sensitive values in the device documentation by the string `<removed>` by default, similar to the output of `show run sanitized` on EOS.
- It is also possible to generate the intended configurations by replacing the sensitive data by `<removed>` but this is not the case by default
- This behavior can be controlled using the following variables:

    ```yaml
    eos_cli_config_gen_documentation:
      hide_passwords: <bool> # default true
    eos_cli_config_gen_configuration:
      hide_passwords: <bool> # default false
    ```

**NOTE:** The `structured_config` generated by `eos_designs` role cannot be sanitized.

#### Roles `cvp_configlet_upload` and `eos_config_deploy_cvp` default to `cv_collection: v3`

The roles `arista.avd.cvp_configlet_upload` and `arista.avd.eos_config_deploy_cvp` leverage modules from the `arista.cvp`
collection to perform actions on the CloudVision platform. These modules are currently available in `v1` and `v3` variants, but `v1` modules
have been deprecated and will be removed from the `arista.cvp` collection in version 4.0.0.

With AVD version 4.0.0 the default `cv_collection` is set to `v3`.

The `v3` modules are mostly compatible with the `v1` modules with a few known gaps:

- `v3` is missing support for hostnames with dots like `leaf1.dc2`.
- The implementation of `v3` in `eos_config_deploy_cvp` is missing support for the `absent` option.

`v1` modules can still be used by setting `cv_collection: v1`, as long as the `arista.cvp` collection is not upgraded to 4.0.0 or above.
