---
# This title is used for search results
title: Release Notes for AVD 5.x.x
---
<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) 2024 Arista Networks, Inc.
  ~ Use of this source code is governed by the Apache License 2.0
  ~ that can be found in the LICENSE file.
  -->

# Release Notes for AVD 5.x.x

- Documentation for AVD version `5.x.x` [available here](https://avd.arista.com/devel/)

## Release 5.0.0

### Changes to requirements

- AVD v.5.0.0 requires Python version 3.10 or newer.
- AVD now requires the `cvprac` Python library to be version 1.4.0 or higher.<br>
  The latest version can be installed with `pip install "cvprac>=1.4.0" --upgrade`. has been removed from the `arista.avd` Ansible collection in v5.0.0.

### Removal of Ansible components

The following ansible components have been removed from the `arista.avd` Ansible collection in v5.0.0.

Filters:

- `arista.avd.convert_dicts`
- `arista.avd.hash_passphrase`
- `arista.avd.generate_esi`
- `arista.avd.generate_lacp_id`
- `arista.avd.generate_route_target`

Action plugins / Modules:

- `arista.avd.deploy_to_cv`
- `arista.avd.batch_template`
- `arista.avd.validate_and_template`
- `arista.avd.yaml_templates_to_facts`
- `arista.avd._emit_warning`

Roles:

- `arista.avd.deploy_to_cv`

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#removal-of-ansible-components) for details.

### Data model changes from "dict-of-dicts" to "list-of-dicts"

In AVD 4.0.0 and across both `eos_designs` and `eos_cli_config_gen`, *all* "dict-of-dicts" data models with user-defined keys were changed to "list-of-dicts".
In AVD 4.x inputs were auto-converted to the new data models.

As of AVD 5.0.0 the automatic conversion from dict-of-dicts has been removed, so it is required to update the input data to the new data models.
The `avd_data_conversion_mode` key has also been removed.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#data-model-changes-from-dict-of-dicts-to-list-of-dicts) for details.

### Removal of Ansible tags from AVD roles

Support for Ansible tags across AVD roles has been replaced with variables to control the execution of various parts of AVD.

The previous implementation of Ansible tags needed to be more consistent, and they were mostly undocumented. It often led to inconsistent behaviors depending on when the tags were used with `--tags` vs. `--skip-tags`.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#removal-of-ansible-tags-from-avd-roles) for details.

### All eos_designs and eos_cli_config_gen variables are always validated by schemas

In AVD 5.0.0, all `eos_designs` and `eos_cli_config_gen` keys are validated by schemas and execution will stop for any violations.
If additional custom keys are desired, a key starting with an underscore `_`, will be ignored.

!!! danger
    The input variable `avd_data_validation_mode` now has a default value of `error`, and while it can be set to `warning`, this is highly discouraged.
    All AVD code relies on the validation to ensure valid data, so the code assumes that the data is valid.

    If the validation mode is set to `warning`, execution will continue with invalid data, which can lead to hard-to-read errors or incorrect behavior.

### Breaking or behavioral changes in eos_cli_config_gen

Breaking changes may require modifications to the inventory or playbook. See the [Porting guide for AVD 5.x.x](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md)
for details.

TODO: add level4 sections for breaking changes outlining the change and referring to porting guide for migration.

#### No auto-conversion of old data model for `router_bgp.redistribute_routes` and `router_bgp.vrfs[].redistribute_routes`

The data models for `router_bgp.redistribute_routes` and `router_bgp.vrfs[].redistribute_routes` previously supported either a list of strings or a dict-of-dicts.
In 4.0.0 this was changed to a list-of-dicts with automatic conversion from any of the previous models into the new model.

As of AVD 5.0.0 the automatic conversion from both of the previous models has been removed, so it is required to update the input data to the new data models.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#no-auto-conversion-of-old-data-model-for-router_bgpredistribute_routes-and-router_bgpvrfsredistribute_routes) for details.

#### `monitor_sessions` no longer requires both `monitor_sessions.sources` and `monitor_sessions.destinations` to be defined for generating configuration

See the [porting_guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#monitor_sessions-no-longer-requires-both-monitor_sessions.sources-and-monitor_sessions.destinations-to-be-defined-for-generating-configuration) for details.

#### `router_isis.address_family_ipv4/6.enabled` is now `Required` to generate the configuration and documentation for router_isis address-families

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#router_isisaddress_family_ipv46enabled-is-now-required-to-generate-the-configuration-and-documentation-for-router_isis-address-families) for details.

#### `ip_security.sa_policies[].esp.integrity` and `.encryption` `null` option has been replaced with `disabled`

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#ip_securitysa_policiesespintegrity-and-encryption-null-option-has-been-replaced-with-disabled) for details.

#### `router_ospf.redistribute.bgp/connected/static.enabled` is required

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#router_ospfredistributebgpconnectedstatic-data-model-has-been-updated-to-require-the-enabled-key) for details.

#### `router_traffic_engineering.enabled` is required

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#router_traffic_engineeringenabled-is-required) for details.

#### Removal of schema in JSON format

The `eos_cli_config_gen.jsonschema.json` is no longer generated. This schema was not being used and had never been complete.

#### Removal of default type `switched` from ethernet interfaces and port-channel interfaces

Starting AVD 5.0.0, the default value for `type` in `ethernet_interfaces` and `port_channel_interfaces` is no longer supported. The `type` key must now be explicitly defined in the input variables if it is needed in the configuration and documentation.

#### Removal of `type` key dependency for rendering ethernet/port-channel interfaces configuration and documentation

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#removal-of-type-key-dependency-for-rendering-ethernetport-channel-interfaces-configuration-and-documentation) for details.

### Breaking or behavioral changes in eos_designs

Breaking changes may require modifications to the inventory or playbook. See the [Porting guide for AVD 5.x.x](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md)
for details.

TODO: add level4 sections for breaking changes outlining the change and referring to porting guide for migration.

#### Structured Configuration merged from SVI profiles is now deep merged instead of replaced

When merging `structured_config` from SVI profiles and parent profiles, AVD versions below 5.0.0 replaced the entire `structured_config` object with the most specific definition of `structured_config`.

With AVD version 5.0.0 `structured_config` is now deep-merged, the same as for other profiles in AVD. This allows the user to contribute different parts of the `structured_config` from profiles or parent profiles.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#) for details.

#### custom_structured_configuration_prefix no longer accepts a string

Starting AVD 5.0.0, `custom_structured_configuration_prefix` only accepts a list of strings.
Previously it also accepted a string, which was autoconverted to a list.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#) for details.

#### default_overlay_address_families and overlay_address_families no longer accept a string

Starting AVD 5.0.0, `node_type_keys[].default_overlay_address_families` and `<node_type_key>.defaults.overlay_address_families` only accept a list of strings.
Previously they also accepted a string, which was autoconverted to a list.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#) for details.

#### Shutdown interfaces and BGP towards undeployed peers by default

Starting AVD 5.0.0, the default value of `shutdown_bgp_towards_undeployed_peers` and `shutdown_interfaces_towards_undeployed_peers` is `true`.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#default-value-of-shutdown_bgp_towards_undeployed_peers-and-shutdown_interfaces_towards_undeployed_peers-is-changed-to-true) for details.

#### mpls_route_servers no longer accepts a string

Starting AVD 5.0.0, `<node_type_key>.defaults.mpls_route_servers` only accepts a list of strings.
Previously it also accepted a string, which was autoconverted to a list.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#) for details.

#### Default MTU value changed from `9214` to `9194` for Dps1, WAN HA and WAN p2p uplink interfaces

Starting AVD 5.0.0, the default MTU for Dps1, WAN HA and WAN p2p uplink interfaces changed from `9214` to `9194`.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#default-mtu-value-changed-from-9214-to-9194-for-dps1-wan-ha-and-wan-p2p-uplink-interfaces) for details.

#### Default value for OSPF area has been updated to "0.0.0.0"

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#default-value-for-ospf-area-has-been-updated-to-0000) for details.

#### Only render IGMP snooping querier version and address when enabled

Starting from AVD 5.0.0, the `ip igmp snooping vlan` command for version and address is rendered only when the IGMP snooping querier is enabled.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#only-render-igmp-snooping-querier-version-and-address-when-enabled) for details.

#### ipv6_virtual_router_addresses are now configured if ipv6_enable is true on SVIs

For SVIs with `ipv6_virtual_router_addresses` set, AVD versions below 5.0.0 only rendered the configuration if `ipv6_address`
was also set on the SVI.

With AVD version 5.0.0 `ipv6_virtual_router_addresses` are rendered in the configuration if either `ipv6_address` or `ipv6_enable: true` is set.

#### ipv6_address_virtuals are now only configured on SVIs if ipv6_virtual_router_addresses are not set

AVD versions below 5.0.0 had a bug where `ipv6_address_virtuals` were rendered in the configuration even if `ipv6_virtual_router_addresses` were
set. Instead `ipv6_address_virtuals` were removed if the IPv4 `ip_virtual_router_addresses` were set.

With AVD version 5.0.0 `ipv6_address_virtuals` are only rendered in the configuration when `ipv6_virtual_router_addresses` are not set for a specific node.
`ip_virtual_router_addresses` is no longer used to decide whether `ipv6_address_virtuals` are configured.

#### Removal of schema in JSON format

The `eos_designs.jsonschema.json` is no longer generated. This schema was not being used and had never been complete.

#### Removed redistribute igmp from BGP VLAN config belonging to a VRF with EVPN Multicast

Having `redistribute igmp` configured for a BGP SVIs with both L2 and L3 EVPN Multicast enabled will take up additional control-plane and data-plane resources.
Starting AVD 5.0.0, by default `redistribute igmp` will only get configured when `evpn_l2_multicast` is True and `evpn_l3_multicast` for the VRF is `false`.

See the [Porting guide for AVD 5.x.x](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#removed-redistribute-igmp-from-bgp-vlan-config-belong-to-a-vrf-with-evpn-multicast)

#### `vrf_id` will be used instead of `vrf_vni` to get the ip address of evpn underlay multicast group

Starting AVD 5.0.0, `vrf_id` is used instead of `vrf_vni` in the algorithm to set the offset for IP address of the EVPN underlay multicast group when `evpn_l3_multicast` is enabled.

See the [Porting guide for AVD 5.x.x](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#vrf_id-is-used-instead-of-vrf_vni-to-calculate-the-ip-address-of-evpn-underlay-multicast-group-for-a-vrf)

#### `AvdInterfaceDescriptions` breaking changes

The class `AvdInterfaceDescriptions` was moved to `pyavd` and heavily modified.
Users who have subclassed it for custom descriptions will have to adjust their code.
The updated version gives more flexibility to customizing interface descriptions.

See the [Porting guide for AVD 5.x.x](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#the-base-class-for-custom-interface-descriptions-avdinterfacedescriptions-was-moved)

#### Reference to a non-existing profile now raise an error

With AVD version 5.0.0, if any referenced profile or parent profile is not defined, AVD will now raise an error. This helps catching typos in the input variables.

This applies to:

- `l3_interface_profiles`
- `port_profiles`
- `svi_profiles`
- `ptp_profiles`

#### `wan_mode: autovpn` renamed `wan_mode: legacy-autovpn`

With AVD version 5.0.0 the valid values for the `wan_mode` key are now `legacy-autovpn | cv-pathfinder`.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#wan-mode-autovpn-renamed-wan-mode-legacy-vpn) for details.

#### Default encapsulation for WAN EVPN iBGP peerings changed to `path-selection`

With AVD version 5.0.0, the default encapsulation used for EVPN iBGP peering between WAN routers is `path-selection`. Previously, it was `vxlan`.

!!! danger
    The `path-selection` encapsulation is only supported on EOS above 4.33.0F.

    It is critical that all WAN devices use the same encapsulation. For
    existing deployments, it is recommended to set the encapsulation back to
    `vxlan` until a migration can be done across the entire WAN network.

    Contact your Arista account team for guidance on migration.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#default-encapsulation-for-wan-evpn-ibgp-peerings-changed-to-path-selection) for details.

#### Preview WAN HA Direct Link now uses Port-Channel by default

TODO: Keep Preview changes at the end as we warn users that Preview mean changes

For WAN direct HA, AVD will now configure a port-channel by default.
This feature was introduced recently in EOS and may not be supported on your version.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#preview-wan-ha-direct-link-now-uses-port-channel-by-default) for details.

### Prevent redistributing the MLAG peer link subnets into BGP for all VRFs by default

Starting AVD 5.0.0, the default value of `redistribute_mlag_ibgp_peering_vrfs` changed to `false`.

See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#prevent-redistributing-the-mlag-peer-link-subnets-into-bgp-for-all-vrfs-by-default)

### Other breaking or behavioral changes

Breaking changes may require modifications to the inventory or playbook. See the [Porting guide for AVD 5.x.x](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md)
for details.

TODO: add level4 sections for breaking changes outlining the change and referring to porting guide for migration.

### Breaking or behavioral changes in eos_validate_state

Starting AVD 5.0.0, `eos_validate_state` uses ANTA as backend, which will change the default behavior (same as setting `use_anta: true` in the latest AVD 4.x.x versions).
If you have not been using `use_anta: true` in latest versions of AVD 4.x.x, please go through the following sections for details on the changes.

Please report any issues on the GitHub [discussions board](https://github.com/aristanetworks/avd/discussions).

Breaking changes may require modifications to the inventory, input variables or playbooks. See the [Porting guide for AVD 5.x.x](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md)
for details.

#### Loose mode is the only supported mode

In the previous implementation, loose mode was used by default to avoid stopping the playbook and hence the tests when they were run task by task in Ansible. It was possible to turn loose mode off with a variable that would make the playbook stop at the first failing tasks for whatever reason on each host.

Loose mode is now the default and all the tests are always run and the errors are all present in the final report.

- No porting guide entry.

#### Input for hardware tests have been updated

The inputs for the hardware test have changed. See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#input-for-hardware-tests-have-been-updated) for details.

#### Filtering tests using Ansible tags support was removed

Instead use the `skip_tests` mechanism. See the [porting guide](../porting-guides/5.x.x.md#filtering-tests-using-ansible-tags-support-was-removed) for details.

#### Changes to CSV and Markdown reports

- Hardware tests are now collapsed.
- Sorting of test results is now done per device as opposed to per category.
- Test categories, descriptions and inputs have been improved to follow ANTA.
- CSV report headers updated from `test_id,node,test_category,test_description,test,result,failure_reason` to `id,dut,categories,test,description,inputs,result,messages`
- Tests skipped by ANTA will be marked as `SKIPPED` in the final reports.

#### Undeployed devices

- All tests will be removed from the catalog for a device flagged as undeployed using the host level variable [`is_deployed: false`](https://avd.sh/en/stable/roles/eos_designs/docs/input-variables.html#flagging-a-device-as-not-deployed). Additionally, all tests take into account the `is_deployed` variable value and remove tests accordingly.

!!! warning
    Tests can also be automatically removed from the catalogs depending on the structured configuration of the devices. ANTA is therefore not aware of these tests and they will not appear in the final report. For example, the `AvdTestMLAG` tests will not be present in the test catalog of a device that does not have an MLAG configuration in its structured configuration.

#### BGP test change

- BGP tests will only run if `service_routing_protocols_model` is set to `multi-agent` in the structured configuration file.

!!! note
    Starting from version 4.30.1F, `service_routing_protocols_model` is set to `multi-agent` by default on EOS devices.

#### Inband management reachability test change

- Inband management reachability test has been refactored to support AVD inband management [data model](https://avd.sh/en/stable/roles/eos_designs/docs/input-variables.html#node-type-inband-management).

### Deprecation of design.type

The variable `design.type` is used to select between different variants of default values for `node_type_keys`.
In AVD 5.0.0 the default values of `node_type_keys` for the default `design.type` `l3ls-evpn` has been updated to combine all the default node type from all designs.
This means it is no longer needed to set the `design.type`.

The default `node_type_keys` for the default design `l3ls-evpn` has been extended with the following node types:

- `l2spine` copied from the `spine` type of the `l2ls` design.
- `l3spine` copied from the `l2ls` design.
- `rr`, `p` and `pe` copied from the `mpls` design.

The `leaf` type used by the `l2ls` design is already covered by the `l2leaf` type in the `l3ls-evpn` design.

To migrate an existing inventory using the `l2ls` design, the following changes are needed:

```diff
# Remove the design.type setting
- design:
-   type: l2ls

# Replace the type 'spine' with 'l2spine'
- type: spine
+ type: l2spine

- spine:
+ l2spine:
    ...

# Replace type the 'leaf' with 'l2leaf'
- type: leaf
+ type: l2leaf

- leaf:
+ l2leaf:
    ...
```
