---
# This title is used for search results
title: Role configuration for eos_designs
---
<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) 2023-2024 Arista Networks, Inc.
  ~ Use of this source code is governed by the Apache License 2.0
  ~ that can be found in the LICENSE file.
  -->

# Role configuration for eos_designs

Role configuration settings can be set either as regular inventory variables or directly as task_vars on the `import_role` task.

## Role default output directories

Default output directories can be updated by modifying the default role variables:

``` yaml
--8<--
roles/eos_designs/defaults/main/output_directories.yml
--8<--
```

!!! tip
    You might need the outputs generated by AVD in a different folder than inventory (the default). If updating `root_dir`, leverage a relative path from `inventory_dir` to ensure consistent behavior. Example: `root_dir: '{{ inventory_dir}/../outputs'`.

## Input Variables Validation settings

Schema validation is built in to the central Action plugins used in AVD. Each plugin runs variable type conversion first and then
performs validation of the converted data.

By default any data validation issues will trigger errors - blocking further processing.
This behavior can be adjusted by setting the variable described below.

!!! danger
    The input variable `avd_data_validation_mode` now has a default value of `error`, and while it can be set to `warning`, this is highly discouraged.
    All AVD code relies on the validation to ensure valid data, so the code assumes that the data is valid.

    If the validation mode is set to `warning`, execution will continue with invalid data, which can lead to hard-to-read errors or incorrect behavior.

--8<--
roles/eos_designs/docs/tables/role-input-validation.md
--8<--

## Generation of facts, structured configuration and documentation

The following settings can be leveraged to control generation of facts, structured configuration and fabric documentation.

--8<--
roles/eos_designs/docs/tables/role-settings.md
--8<--

## Custom Templates

--8<--
roles/eos_designs/docs/tables/role-custom-templates.md
--8<--
