# Porting Guide for Ansible AVD 4.x.x

Major releases of AVD can contain breaking changes. The porting guide addresses how to update your inventory
and playbooks to be compatible with new default behaviors and changed data models, when upgrading from AVD 3.x.x versions.

Users of `eos_designs` do not have to consider the changes in `eos_cli_config_gen`, since those adaptions are
built in to `eos_designs`.

## Changes to role `arista.avd.eos_designs`

### Network services variables

- `evpn_rd_type` has been removed and replaced with `overlay_rd_type`.
- `evpn_rt_type` has been removed and replaced with `overlay_rt_type`.
- `vxlan_vlan_aware_bundles` has been removed and replaced with `evpn_vlan_aware_bundles`

### P2P uplink mtu

The default value for `p2p_uplinks_mtu` has changed from 9000 to 9214.

To retain AVD 3.8 behavior set `p2p_uplinks_mtu` to 9000.

```yaml
p2p_uplinks_mtu: 9000
```

#### MLAG peer link allowed vlans

`mlag_peer_link_allowed_vlans` no longer has a default value of "2-4094".

To retain AVD 3.8 behavior set `mlag_peer_link_allowed_vlans` to "2-4094":

```yaml
l3leaf:
  defaults:
    mlag_peer_link_allowed_vlans: "2-4094"
```

#### BGP variables

A new key, `bgp_default_ipv4_unicast: <bool> -> default false` was introduced to implement the best practice of disabling the default activation of IPv4 unicast address-family.

To change the default behavior, set the key to true:

```yaml
bgp_default_ipv4_unicast: true
```

Configuration under the `<node_type_key>.defaults.bgp_defaults` should also be removed to avoid duplicate entries in the configuration.

Example:

```yaml
l3leaf:
  defaults:
    bgp_defaults:
      # - no bgp default ipv4-unicast <--- remove this item to avoid duplicates
```

!!! note
    This will now explicitly activate or deactivate bgp_default_ipv4_unicast in the EOS configuration.

A new key, `bgp_graceful_restart` was introduced to implement the best practice of enabling bgp graceful restart with a graceful restart time of 300 seconds.

To change the default behavior update the following variables

```yaml
bgp_graceful_restart:
  enabled: <bool> -> default true
  restart_time: <int> -> default 300
```

Configuration under the `<node_type_key>.defaults.bgp_defaults` should also be removed to avoid duplicate entries in the configuration.

Example:

```yaml
l3leaf:
  defaults:
    bgp_defaults:
      # - graceful-restart restart-time 300 <--- remove this item to avoid duplicates
      # - graceful-restart <--- remove this item to avoid duplicates
```

With AVD version 4.0.0, the default configuration generated by `eos_designs` have `update wait-install` configured under `router_bgp` and BGP VRF definitions for VRFs containing BGP peerings.

To change the default behavior update the following variable to false:

```yaml
bgp_update_wait_install: false
```

The following keys under `bgp_peer_groups` have been replaced to avoid upper-case variables.

Removed keys:

```yaml
bgp_peer_groups:
  IPv4_UNDERLAY_PEERS:
  MLAG_IPv4_UNDERLAY_PEER:
  EVPN_OVERLAY_PEERS:
```

Replacement keys:

```yaml
bgp_peer_groups:
  ipv4_underlay_peers:
  mlag_ipv4_underlay_peer:
  evpn_overlay_peers:
```

TODO: Add link to data model once schema is done.

#### ISIS underlay variables

- `isis_default_circuit_type`  default changed from `level-1-2` (EOS default) to `level-2`.

To keep EOS default isis circuit-type set:

```yaml
isis_default_circuit_type: "level-1-2"
```

!!! note
    This will now print `isis circuit-type level-1-2` in the EOS configuration matching the EOS default isis circuit-type.

### L3 Edge variables

- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].qos_profile` default changed from `null` to now leverage `p2p_uplinks_qos_profile` as its default value.

To keep AVD 3.8 behavior set:

```yaml
l3_edge:
  p2p_links:
    - qos_profile: null
```

- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].include_in_underlay_protocol` default changed from `false` to `true`.

To keep AVD 3.8 behavior set:

```yaml
l3_edge:
  p2p_links:
    - include_in_underlay_protocol: false
```

- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].isis_circuit_type` -> default changed from `level-1-2` (EOS default) set by `isis_default_circuit_type` to `level-2`.

To keep AVD 3.8 behavior set:

```yaml
l3_edge:
  p2p_links:
    - isis_circuit_type: "level-1-2"
```

!!! note
    This will now print `isis circuit-type level-1-2` in the EOS configuration matching the EOS default isis circuit-type.

- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].isis_hello_padding` default changed from `false` to `true` (EOS default).

No changes required to variables, since this matches to EOS default configuration.

!!! note
    This will now print `isis hello padding` in the EOS configuration matching the EOS default.

- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].ptp_enable` changed to `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].ptp.enabled` to create syntax consistency when configuring PTP:

Old syntax

```yaml
l3_edge:
  p2p_links:
      ptp_enable: true
```

New syntax

```yaml
l3_edge:
  p2p_links:
      ptp:
        enabled: true
```

- `l3_edge.p2p_links.[].ptp.enabled` requires the `ptp.enabled: true` to be set at the fabric level.

Set the following variable at the fabric level.

```yaml
ptp:
  enabled: true
```

### Core interfaces variables

- `core_interfaces.p2p_links.[].ptp_enable` changed to `core_interfaces.p2p_links.[].ptp.enabled` to create syntax consistency when configuring PTP:

Old syntax

```yaml
core_interfaces:
  p2p_links:
      ptp_enable: true
```

New syntax

```yaml
core_interfaces:
  p2p_links:
      ptp:
        enabled: true
```

- `core_interfaces.p2p_links.[].ptp.enabled` requires the `ptp.enabled: true` to be set at the fabric level.

Set the following variable at the fabric level.

```yaml
ptp:
  enabled: true
```

### Connected endpoints

The `connected_endpoints_key.[].adapters.[].server_ports` has been removed and replaced with `connected_endpoints_key.[].adapters.[].endpoint_ports` in order to be generic across endpoint types.

Removed keys:

```yaml
<connected_endpoints_keys.key>:
  - name: <str>
    adapters:
      - server_ports:
```

Replacement keys:

```yaml
<connected_endpoints_keys.key>:
  - name: <str>
    adapters:
      - endpoint_ports:
```

### IP and IPv6 routing is no longer configured on pure L2 devices

For node types like `l2leaf` where `underlay_router` is set to `false` under `node_type_keys` AVD versions below 4.0.0
still rendered `ip routing`, `ip routing ipv6 interfaces` and/or `ipv6 unicast-routing` in the configuration.
As of AVD version 4.0.0 these IP and IPv6 routing configurations are no longer configured for `l2leaf`
or other node types with `underlay_router: false`.

To retain the old behavior the inventory can be updated like this:

```yaml
l2leaf:
  defaults:
    always_configure_ip_routing: true
```

### BGP is no longer configured on irrelevant nodes

An example of an "irrelevant node" is a pure L3 Spine in L3LS running ISIS or OSPF in the underlay. As long as the spine is not
set as route-server for any overlay BGP protocol, there is no need for `router bgp <asn>` to be configured on this device.

Example of default configuration previously generated but now removed:

```eos
router bgp 65000
  router-id 192.168.255.2
  maximum-paths 4 ecmp 4
```

To retain the old behavior the inventory can be updated like this:

```yaml
spine:
  defaults:
    structured_config:
      router_bgp:
        as: '65000'
        router_id: 192.168.255.2
        maximum_paths:
          paths: 4
          ecmp: 4
```

### Link-local IPv6 addressing is implicitly enabled when configuring IPv6 Anycast IP

Per Arista best practice, all SVIs configured with `ipv6 address virtual` should also have
`ipv6 enable` configured, to use link-local IPv6 addresses for NDv6 operations.

With AVD version 4.0.0 this best practice is now implemented by default.

Example input:

```yaml
tenants:
  - name: mytenant
    <...>
    vrfs:
      - name: myvrf
        <...>
        svis:
          - id: 123
            <...>
            ipv6_address_virtuals:
              - 2001:db8:12::1/64
```

Now renders:

```eos
interface Vlan123
  <...>
  ipv6 enable                  ! <-- New command
  ipv6 address virtual 2001:db8:12::1/64
```

To retain the old behavior the inventory can be updated like this:

```yaml
tenants:
  - name: mytenant
    <...>
    vrfs:
      - name: myvrf
        <...>
        svis:
          - id: 123
            <...>
            ipv6_address_virtuals:
              - 2001:db8:12::1/64
            ipv6_enable: false # <--- Overriding the new default behavior
```

### Changes to inband management for L2 switches

With AVD version 4.0.0 some of the default values for inband management are changing:

- The SVI MTU was derived from `p2p_uplinks_mtu` with a default value of `9000`. Now the SVI MTU defaults to `1500` and is configurable with `inband_mgmt_mtu`.
- The SVI description was hardcoded to `L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT`. Now the default SVI description is `Inband Management` and is configurable with `inband_mgmt_description`.
- The VLAN name was hardcoded to `L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT`. Now the default VLAN name is `INBAND_MGMT` and is configurable with `inband_mgmt_vlan_name`.

See the following example on how to modify the values to retain the previous default behavior.

Previous default configuration:

```eos
vlan 4092
  name L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT

interface Vlan4092
  description L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT
  mtu 9000
  <...>
```

New default configuration:

```eos
vlan 4092
  name INBAND_MGMT

interface Vlan4092
  description Inband Management
  mtu 1500
  <...>
```

To retain the old behavior the inventory can be updated like this:

```yaml
l2leaf:
  defaults:
    inband_mgmt_mtu: 9000
    inband_mgmt_vlan_name: L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT
    inband_mgmt_description: L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT

l3leaf:
  defaults:
    inband_mgmt_mtu: 9000
    inband_mgmt_vlan_name: L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT
    inband_mgmt_description: L2LEAF_INBAND_MGMT
```

## Changes to role `arista.avd.eos_cli_config_gen`

### Non port-channel related config is no longer ignored on port-channel member ethernet_interfaces

The change has been incorporated into `eos_designs` so action is only required when defining new interfaces
with `structured_config`, `custom_structured_configuration_` or when using `eos_cli_config_gen` directly.

With AVD 4.0.0 port-channel member interfaces defined under `ethernet_interfaces` will no longer ignore the
`type` setting which defaults to `switched`. Other switchport or IP related features are also no longer ignored.

For interfaces with LACP fallback, this may be the intended behavior, and this is the reason for this change.

Example input:

```yaml
ethernet_interfaces:
  - name: Ethernet2
    channel_group:
      id: 2
      mode: active
    mode: access    # <--- These are just examples of "other configurations"
    vlans: 123      # <--- that were previously ignored.
```

Previous output:

```eos
interface Ethernet2
   channel-group 2 mode active
```

AVD version 4.0.0 output:

```eos
interface Ethernet2
   switchport
   switchport mode access
   switchport access vlan 123
   channel-group 2 mode active
```

To retain the previous configuration, the interface definition must be updated like this:

```yaml
ethernet_interfaces:
  - name: Ethernet2
    type: port-channel-member
    channel_group:
      id: 2
      mode: active
```

### New model for `hardware_counters.features`

The `hardware_counters.features` model has been improved to allow more options.

TODO: add link to the full data model

Example with old data model:

```yaml
hardware_counters:
  features:
    - ip: in
    - ip: out
    - vlan-interfaces: in
```

Same example with new data model:

```yaml
hardware_counters:
  features:
    - name: ip
      direction: out
    - name: ip
      direction: in
    - name: vlan-interfaces
      direction: in
```

### New model for `ip_name_servers`

The `name_server` key has been deprecated in favor of `ip_name_servers`, more
aligned with the EOS cli.

TODO: add link to the full data model

Example with old data model:

```yaml
name_server:
  source:
    vrf: MGMT
  nodes:
    - 8.8.8.8
```

Same example with new data model:

```yaml
ip_name_servers:
  - ip_address: 8.8.8.8
    vrf: MGMT
```

### New behavior for `ip_igmp_snooping`

Disabling IGMP Snooping globally no longer blocks other IGMP snooping configuration.

Example input:

```yaml
ip_igmp_snooping:
  globally_enabled: false
  vlans:
    - id: 10
      enabled: true
    - id: 20
      enabled: false
    - id: 30
      enabled: false
```

Previous output:

```eos
no ip igmp snooping
```

AVD version 4.0.0 output:

```eos
no ip igmp snooping
ip igmp snooping vlan 10
no ip igmp snooping vlan 20
no ip igmp snooping vlan 30
```

While EOS accepts the extra configuration, IGMP snooping is still effectively disabled.
To remove the extra configuration, the inputs have to be removed like:

```yaml
ip_igmp_snooping:
  globally_enabled: false
```

### Require `enabled` key under `queue_monitor_length`

To avoid ambiguous YAML data input, the data model for `queue_monitor_length` has been updated to require the `enabled` key to be set.

Example with the old data model:

```yaml
queue_monitor_length:
  <...>
```

Same example with the updated data model:

```yaml
queue_monitor_length:
  enabled: true
  <...>
```

The change has been incorporated into `eos_designs` so action is only required when defining `structured_configuration` directly.

### New required `enabled` key under `vlan_interfaces.[].ip_attached_host_route_export`

To avoid ambiguous YAML data input, the data model for `vlan_interfaces.[].ip_attached_host_route_export` has been updated to require
an `enabled: true` key to be added.

Example with old data model (shown with old dictionary form input):

```yaml
vlan_interfaces:
  Vlan86:
    ip_address: 10.10.83.1/24
    ip_attached_host_route_export: {}
```

Same example with new data model (shown with new list form input):

```yaml
vlan_interfaces:
  - name: Vlan86
    ip_address: 10.10.83.1/24
    ip_attached_host_route_export:
      enabled: true
```

The change has been incorporated into `eos_designs` so action is only required when defining `structured_configuration` directly.

### New data model for `address_families` under `router_bgp.vrfs`

An improved data model for address family configuration under `router_bgp.vrfs` has been added containing discrete models for the different address families, along with better subkeys for `bgp additional-paths` configuration options. A new key was added for `router_bgp.vrfs[].address_family_ipv4.peer_groups[].next_hop.address_family_ipv6.enabled` to configure the `neighbor <peer-group> next-hop address-family ipv6` command without the `originate` keyword.

Example with old data model (list of dictionaries):

```yaml
router_bgp:
  vrfs:
    - name: VRF001
      address_families:
        - address_family: ipv4
          bgp:
            additional_paths:
              - send any
          neighbors:
            - ip_address: 10.2.3.4
              activate: true
              route_map_out: RM-10.2.3.4-SET-NEXT-HOP-OUT
          networks:
            - prefix: 100.64.0.0/10
              route_map: RM-10.2.3.4
          peer_groups:
            - name: TEST_PEER_GRP
              activate: true
              next_hop:
                address_family_ipv6_originate: true
        - address_family: ipv6
          ...
```

Example with new data model (discrete dictionary keys for all supported address families):

```yaml
router_bgp:
  vrfs:
    - name: VRF001
      address_family_ipv4:
        bgp:
          additional_paths:
            send:
              any: true
        neighbors:
          - ip_address: 10.2.3.4
            activate: true
            route_map_out: RM-10.2.3.4-SET-NEXT-HOP-OUT
        networks:
          - prefix: 100.64.0.0/10
            route_map: RM-10.2.3.4
        peer_groups:
          - name: TEST_PEER_GRP
            activate: true
            next_hop:
              address_family_ipv6:
                enabled: true
                originate: true
      address_family_ipv6:
        ...
```

The change has been incorporated into `eos_designs` so no action is necessary to retain the same functionality.

It is recommended to migrate to the new data models when using `structured_config` or `custom_structured_configuration_` to add additional configuration options under the VRF address families.

### Sanitized configuration

Starting AVD 4.0.0, the `eos_cli_config_gen` role replaces sensitive values in the device documentation by the string `<removed>` by default, similar to the output of `show run sanitized` on EOS.

To retain the old behavior the inventory can be updated like this:

```yaml
eos_cli_config_gen_documentation:
  hide_passwords: false # default true
```

## Changes to role `arista.avd.eos_config_deploy_cvp`

### Inventory to CloudVision containers

In AVD v4.0.0 the role get support for dynamic Ansible inventories. This means that the basis for CloudVision
containers will no longer be the `inventory.yml` file, but instead the role reads the loaded Ansible inventory.
This inventory can be loaded from dynamic inventory plugins like Ansible Automation Platform, AWX etc.

The new inventory parsing is stricter than the previous method, so all Ansible inventory groups *must* be laid
out as a regular tree structure starting from the `container_root`.

Old behavior can be retained by adding the variable `avd_inventory_to_container_file: "{{ inventory_file }}"` to the playbook task
for `arista.avd.eos_config_deploy_cvp` like this example:

```yaml
- name: Configuration deployment with CVP
  hosts: cv_servers
  connection: local
  gather_facts: false
  collections:
    - arista.avd
  tasks:
    - name: Provision CVP
      import_role:
        name: eos_config_deploy_cvp
      vars:
        container_root: 'DC1_FABRIC'
        configlets_prefix: 'AVD'
        state: present
        avd_inventory_to_container_file: "{{ inventory_file }}"  # <--- Retain old behavior from AVD v3.x.x
```

#### Supported group structure

In this example the `container_root` is set to `DC1_FABRIC`. This means that this, and all groups below will be created
as containers on CloudVision. Devices can be a member of multiple group hierarchies like `DC1_FABRIC` and `DC1_TENANT_NETWORKS`,
as long as the other hierarchies are not below group set as `container_root`.

```yaml
---
all:
  children:
    DC1:
      children:
        DC1_FABRIC:
          children:
            DC1_SPINES:
              hosts:
                DC1-SPINE1:
                DC1-SPINE2:
            DC1_L3LEAFS:
              children:
                DC1_LEAF1:
                  hosts:
                    DC1-LEAF1A:
                    DC1-LEAF1B:
                DC1_LEAF2:
                  hosts:
                    DC1-LEAF2A:
                    DC1-LEAF2B:
        DC1_TENANTS_NETWORKS:  # <--- This group is under DC1, but it is NOT under DC1_FABRIC, so this inventory is supported
          children:
            DC1_L3LEAFS:
```

#### Unsupported group structure

```yaml
---
all:
  children:
    DC1:
      children:
        DC1_FABRIC:
          children:
            DC1_SPINES:
              hosts:
                DC1-SPINE1:
                DC1-SPINE2:
            DC1_L3LEAFS:
              children:
                DC1_LEAF1:
                  hosts:
                    DC1-LEAF1A:
                    DC1-LEAF1B:
                DC1_LEAF2:
                  hosts:
                    DC1-LEAF2A:
                    DC1-LEAF2B:
            DC1_TENANTS_NETWORKS:  # <--- This group is under DC1_FABRIC, making DC1_L3LEAFS have two "parents",
              children:            #      so this inventory is *not* supported with the new inventory parser
                DC1_L3LEAFS:
```

### Roles `cvp_configlet_upload` and `eos_config_deploy_cvp` default to `cv_collection: v3`

The roles `arista.avd.cvp_configlet_upload` and `arista.avd.eos_config_deploy_cvp` leverage modules from the `arista.cvp`
collection to perform actions on the CloudVision platform. These modules are currently available in `v1` and `v3` variants, but `v1` modules
have been deprecated and will be removed from the `arista.cvp` collection in version 4.0.0.

With AVD version 4.0.0 the default `cv_collection` is set to `v3`.

The `v3` modules are mostly compatible with the `v1` modules with a few known gaps:

- `v3` is missing support for hostnames with dots like `leaf1.dc2`.
- The implementation of `v3` in `eos_config_deploy_cvp` is missing support for the `absent` option.

`v1` modules can still be used by setting `cv_collection: v1`, as long as the `arista.cvp` collection is not upgraded to 4.0.0 or above.
